README.md, before:

# Nexus

Reusable GitHub Actions workflows for the Data Science Club.

## Available Workflows

- **Node Build** - Build Node.js applications with Infisical secrets
- **Vercel Deploy** - Deploy to Vercel
- **Quality Gate** - Lint and typecheck
- **Quality Sonar** - SonarQube analysis

## Release Automation

This repository uses **Semantic Release** with manual fallback options.

### Primary: Automatic Semantic Release

**Workflow:** `.github/workflows/release.yml`

Automatically creates releases based on commit messages following [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/).

#### Automatic Mode (Push to main)

When you push to `main`, the workflow automatically:

- Analyzes commit messages since the last release
- Determines the version bump (major, minor, or patch)
- Generates a changelog
- Creates a GitHub release
- Tags the commit

#### Manual Mode (Workflow Dispatch)

For situations where you need manual control:

1. Go to **Actions** → **Release** → **Run workflow**
2. Choose options:
   - **Release type:**
     - `auto` - Use commit messages (default)
     - `major` - Force major version bump (e.g., 1.0.0 → 2.0.0)
     - `minor` - Force minor version bump (e.g., 1.0.0 → 1.1.0)
     - `patch` - Force patch version bump (e.g., 1.0.0 → 1.0.1)
   - **Dry run:** Preview the release without publishing
3. Click **Run workflow**

**Use manual mode when:**

- You need to force a specific version bump regardless of commits
- You want to preview what will be released (dry run)
- Commit messages don't reflect the actual changes
- You need to create a release without new commits

### Fallback: Tag-Based Release

**Workflow:** `.github/workflows/release-tag.yml`

Creates releases when you push a version tag (bypasses semantic-release entirely).

**To use:**

```bash
# Create and push a tag
git tag v1.0.0
git push origin v1.0.0

# For pre-releases
git tag v1.0.0-beta.1
git push origin v1.0.0-beta.1
```

**Use tag-based when:**

- Semantic release is not working
- You need complete manual control
- Creating hotfix releases

## Commit Message Format

Follow [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/) for automatic releases:

```
<type>(<scope>): <description>

[optional body]

[optional footer]
```

### Types

- `feat:` - New feature (triggers **minor** release: 1.0.0 → 1.1.0)
- `fix:` - Bug fix (triggers **patch** release: 1.0.0 → 1.0.1)
- `perf:` - Performance improvement (triggers **patch** release)
- `docs:` - Documentation changes (triggers **patch** release)
- `refactor:` - Code refactoring (triggers **patch** release)
- `chore:` - Maintenance (no release)
- `test:` - Test changes (no release)
- `ci:` - CI changes (no release)
- `BREAKING CHANGE:` - Breaking change (triggers **major** release: 1.0.0 → 2.0.0)

### Example Commits

```bash
# Minor release (new feature)
feat: add new workflow for Docker builds

# Patch release (bug fix)
fix: correct artifact path in build workflow

# Major release (breaking change - option 1)
feat!: redesign workflow input parameters

# Major release (breaking change - option 2)
feat: change deployment strategy

BREAKING CHANGE: deployment now requires vercel-project-id

# No release
chore: update dependencies
test: add unit tests for workflows
```

## Quick Start

### Automatic Release (Recommended)

Just commit using conventional commit format and push to main:

```bash
git commit -m "feat: add new deployment workflow"
git push origin main
# Automatically creates a release!
```

### Manual Release Override

If you need to force a specific version:

1. Go to **Actions** → **Release**
2. Click **Run workflow**
3. Select `major`, `minor`, or `patch`
4. Click **Run workflow**

### Emergency Tag-Based Release

If semantic-release isn't working:

```bash
git tag v1.0.0
git push origin v1.0.0
```

## Configuration

The semantic release is configured via `.releaserc.json` in the repository root.

📖 **For detailed release workflow guidance, see [RELEASE_GUIDE.md](RELEASE_GUIDE.md)**

Commit message:

Migrate release workflow from semantic-release to github-tag-action
Replaces semantic-release with github-tag-action for automatic versioning and release creation. Updates release.yml workflow, removes .releaserc.json and CHANGELOG.md, and revises documentation in README.md and pull request template to reflect the new release process.

README.md, after:

# Nexus

Reusable GitHub Actions workflows for the Data Science Club.

## Available Workflows

- **Node Build** - Build Node.js applications with Infisical secrets
- **Vercel Deploy** - Deploy to Vercel
- **Quality Gate** - Lint and typecheck
- **Quality Sonar** - SonarQube analysis

## Release Automation

This repository uses **automatic versioning** based on conventional commits with manual fallback options.

### Primary: Automatic Release

**Workflow:** `.github/workflows/release.yml`

Automatically creates releases based on commit messages following [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/).

#### Automatic Mode (Push to main)

When you push to `main`, the workflow automatically:

- Analyzes commit messages since the last release
- Determines the version bump (major, minor, or patch)
- Creates and pushes a version tag (e.g., `v1.2.3`)
- Generates release notes from commits
- Creates a GitHub release
- Updates the major version tag (e.g., `v1`) to point to the latest release

#### Manual Mode (Workflow Dispatch)

For situations where you need manual control:

1. Go to **Actions** → **Release** → **Run workflow**
2. Choose options:
   - **Release type:**
     - `auto` - Analyze commit messages (default)
     - `major` - Force major version bump (e.g., 1.0.0 → 2.0.0)
     - `minor` - Force minor version bump (e.g., 1.0.0 → 1.1.0)
     - `patch` - Force patch version bump (e.g., 1.0.0 → 1.0.1)
   - **Dry run:** Preview the version and changelog without creating a release
3. Click **Run workflow**

**Use manual mode when:**

- You need to force a specific version bump regardless of commits
- You want to preview what will be released (dry run)
- Commit messages don't reflect the actual changes
- You need to create a release without waiting for new commits

### Fallback: Tag-Based Release

**Workflow:** `.github/workflows/release-tag.yml`

Creates releases when you push a version tag (bypasses automatic versioning entirely).

**To use:**

```bash
# Create and push a tag
git tag v1.0.0
git push origin v1.0.0

# For pre-releases
git tag v1.0.0-beta.1
git push origin v1.0.0-beta.1
```

**Use tag-based when:**

- The automatic release workflow is not working
- You need complete manual control over versioning
- Creating hotfix releases on older versions

## Commit Message Format

Follow [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/) for automatic releases:

```
<type>(<scope>): <description>

[optional body]

[optional footer]
```

### Types

- `feat:` - New feature (triggers **minor** release: 1.0.0 → 1.1.0)
- `fix:` - Bug fix (triggers **patch** release: 1.0.0 → 1.0.1)
- `perf:` - Performance improvement (triggers **patch** release)
- `docs:` - Documentation changes (triggers **patch** release)
- `refactor:` - Code refactoring (triggers **patch** release)
- `chore:` - Maintenance (no release)
- `test:` - Test changes (no release)
- `ci:` - CI changes (no release)
- `BREAKING CHANGE:` - Breaking change (triggers **major** release: 1.0.0 → 2.0.0)

### Example Commits

```bash
# Minor release (new feature)
feat: add new workflow for Docker builds

# Patch release (bug fix)
fix: correct artifact path in build workflow

# Major release (breaking change - option 1)
feat!: redesign workflow input parameters

# Major release (breaking change - option 2)
feat: change deployment strategy

BREAKING CHANGE: deployment now requires vercel-project-id

# No release
chore: update dependencies
test: add unit tests for workflows
```

## Quick Start

### Automatic Release (Recommended)

Just commit using conventional commit format and push to main:

```bash
git commit -m "feat: add new deployment workflow"
git push origin main
# Automatically creates a release!
```

### Manual Release Override

If you need to force a specific version:

1. Go to **Actions** → **Release**
2. Click **Run workflow**
3. Select `major`, `minor`, or `patch`
4. Click **Run workflow**

### Emergency Tag-Based Release

If semantic-release isn't working:

```bash
git tag v1.0.0
git push origin v1.0.0
```

## Configuration

The release workflow uses [github-tag-action](https://github.com/mathieudutour/github-tag-action) to analyze conventional commits and determine version bumps automatically.
